
ابزار GNU Make
   GNU Make  ابزاری است  که نسل اجرایی و  عیر اجرایی دیگر فایلهای یک برنامه را از سورس فایلهای برنامه کنترل میکند.

Make gets دانش بیلد کردن برنامه شما از  فایلی به نام makefile  است که فایلهای بدون سورس وچگونه محاسبه کردن ان از فایلهای دیگر را لیست میکند.وقتی شما یک برنامه مینویسید  بایستی یک makefileبرای آن بنویسید به صورتی که ممکن است برای بیلد کردن و نصب برنامه از make استفاده کنید   

قابلیت های Make

Make آخرین user را برای بیلد کردن و نصب پکیج شما بدون دانستن جزییات چگونه انجام شدن وارد میکند 

make به صورت اتوماتیک براساس اسنکه کدام سورس فایلها تغییر یافته اند متوجه میشود کدام فایلهای آن نیاز به به روز رسانی دارند .make به صورت اتوماتیک تعیین میکند نظم مناسبی برای به روز رسانی فایل ها .برای نمونه یک فایل بدون سورس به دیگر فایل بدون سورس وابسته است 

به عنوان نتیجه اگر تعداد کمی سورس فایل را تغییر دهید و سپس make را اجرا کنید نیازی به کامپایل همهی برنامه های شما نیست.make فقط فایل های بدون سورس که مستقیما یا بصورت عیر مستقیم  در سورس فایل هایی که شما تعییر داده اید را به روز رسانی میکند.


make به زبان خاصی محدود نیست. برای هر فایل بدون سورس در برنامه فایل make دستورات shell را برای محاسبه آن مشخص میکند. کامند های shell میتوانند برای ایجاد یک object file یک کامپایلر اجرا کنندو میتوانند پیوند دهنده برای تولید یک فایل قابل اجرا باشند  یا میتوانند یک کتابخانه را اپدیت کنند یا tex یا makeinfo کنند برای فرمت داکیومنت

make محدود به ساختن یک پکیج نیست.شما میتوانید از make برای کنترل نصب و حذف نصب یک پکیچ  و تولید جداول تگ ها یا هر چیز دیگری که شما میخواهید انجام دهید  اعلب کافیست برای اینکه ان را بدتر کنید  زمانی که مینویسد که  چگونه انجام شود استفاده کنید

قانون ها و اهداف make

یک قانون در فایل make میگوید make چگونه یک سری از دستورات را برای build کردن یک فایل هدف از سورس فایل اجرا کند.همچنین  یک لیست از وابستگی های فایل هدف را مشخص میکند .این لیست باید همه ی فایل هایی(چه سورس فایل ها چه دیگر هدف ها) که به عنوان ورودی هایی برای کامند ها در قانون استفاده میشود را شامل شود.


اینجا یک قانون ساده هست شبیه:


          هدف:وابستگی ها ...
          دستورات
          ...
          

وقتی شما make را اجرا میکنید میتوانید اهداف خاص را برای به روز رسانی مشخص میکند در عیر اینصورت make اولین هدفی که در فایل make لیست شده است را آبدیت میکند.هر فایل هدف دیگری نیاز دارد  به عنوان ورودی برای تولید این اهداف ابتدا به روز رسانی شود. 


make از فایل make استفاده میکند برای محاسبه اینکه کدام فایل ها باید به روز خریداری شوند و سپس 
تعیین میکند کدام یک ار آنها نیاز به به روزرسانی دارند . اگر یک فایل هدف جدید تر از همه ی فایل های هدفی که به آن وابسته اند باشد و سپس اماده به روز شدن باشد و نیاز به تولید دوباره نداشته باشد . بقیه فایل های هدف نیاز به به روز رسانی دارند اما در ترتیب مناسب یعنی هر فایل هدفی باید دوباره تولید شود قبل از اینکهدر تولید ذوباره هدف های دیگر استفاده شود.
Advantages of GNU Make
GNU Make has many powerful features for use in makefiles, beyond what other Make versions have. It can also regenerate, use, and then delete intermediate files which need not be saved.

GNU Make also has a few simple features that are very convenient. For example, the -o file option which says ``pretend that source file file has not changed, even though it has changed.'' This is extremely useful when you add a new macro to a header file. Most versions of Make will assume they must therefore recompile all the source files that use the header file; but GNU Make gives you a way to avoid the recompilation, in the case where you know your change to the header file does not require it.

However, the most important difference between GNU Make and most versions of Make is that GNU Make is free software.

Makefiles And Conventions
We have developed conventions for how to write Makefiles, which all GNU packages ought to follow. It is a good idea to follow these conventions in your program even if you don't intend it to be GNU software, so that users will be able to build your package just like many other packages, and will not need to learn anything special before doing so.

These conventions are found in the chapter ``Makefile conventions'' (147 k characters) of the GNU Coding Standards (147 k characters).

Downloading Make
Make can be found on the main GNU ftp server: http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/make/ (via HTTP) and ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/make/ (via FTP). It can also be found on the GNU mirrors; please use a mirror if possible.

Documentation
Documentation for Make is available online, as is documentation for most GNU software. You may also find more information about Make by running info make or man make, or by looking at /usr/share/doc/make/, /usr/local/doc/make/, or similar directories on your system. A brief summary is available by running make --help.

Mailing lists
Make has the following mailing lists:

bug-make is used to discuss most aspects of Make, including development and enhancement requests, as well as bug reports.
help-make is for general user help and discussion.
Announcements about Make and most other GNU software are made on info-gnu (archive).

Security reports that should not be made immediately public can be sent directly to the maintainer. If there is no response to an urgent issue, you can escalate to the general security mailing list for advice.

Getting involved
Development of Make, and GNU in general, is a volunteer effort, and you can contribute. For information, please read How to help GNU. If you'd like to get involved, it's a good idea to join the discussion mailing list (see above).

Test releases
Trying the latest test release (when available) is always appreciated. Test releases of Make can be found at http://alpha.gnu.org/gnu/make/ (via HTTP) and ftp://alpha.gnu.org/gnu/make/ (via FTP).
Development
For development sources, issue trackers, and other information, please see the Make project page at savannah.gnu.org.
Translating Make
To translate Make's messages into other languages, please see the Translation Project page for Make. If you have a new translation of the message strings, or updates to the existing strings, please have the changes made in this repository. Only translations from this site will be incorporated into Make. For more information, see the Translation Project.
Maintainer
Make is currently being maintained by Paul Smith. Please use the mailing lists for contact.
Licensin
Make is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
